Congresswoman Lori Trahan, a Lowell Democrat, reports bomb threat against her home
Bomb threat sent via email directly to Westford Police Department, official says
Congresswoman Lori Trahan of Lowell said her home was targeted by a bomb threat. (Stuart Cahill/Boston Herald)
Stuart Cahill/Boston Herald Congresswoman Lori Trahan of Lowell said her home was targeted by a bomb threat. (Stuart Cahill/Boston Herald)
Author
By Chris Van Buskirk | cvanbuskirk@bostonherald.com | Boston Herald
UPDATED: December 7, 2024 at 4:00 PM EST


Loading your audio article


U.S. Rep. Lori Trahan’s home was the subject of a bomb threat Saturday morning that prompted local and state police to search her residence for any threats, the federal lawmaker said in a statement.


Trahan, a Lowell Democrat, said she and her family are safe after she was “made aware” of the bomb threat.


Officers from the Westford Police Department and the Massachusetts State Police bomb squad responded to the residence and found “no active threat” after they were “made aware” of the threat around 8:15 a.m., according to Westford Police Cpt. Michael Breault.


“I am grateful to the excellent officers at the Westford Police Department who responded swiftly to make sure we were safe and who are now working with the United States Capitol Police and Massachusetts State Police regarding this incident,” Trahan said in a statement. “It’s a good time to say the obvious: threats of violence and intimidation have no place in our country.”


The bomb threat was sent directly to the Westford Police Department via email, Breault said. Breault did not provide details of the sender, citing an active investigation.


“As soon as we were made aware of it and received it, we responded to her residence, notified Massachusetts State Police bomb squad, notified U.S. Capitol Police, and the residence was checked by State Police bomb squad. They cleared it. There was no active threat there,” Breault told the Herald.


Breault said the Westford Police Department is following up with state police and the United States Capitol Police “to actively investigate this and try to locate a perpetrator.”


A spokesperson for the Massachusetts State Police said a preliminary investigation determined that the incident “appears to be one of several unfounded threats against political figures across the country.”




“The Commonwealth Fusion Center remains in contact with local, state, and federal partners to investigate the source of the threat itself and determine what next steps may be appropriate,” the spokesperson said in a statement to the Herald.


A spokesperson for the United States Capitol Police did not respond to Herald inquiries.


Trahan has represented Massachusetts’ Third Congressional District since 2019 and is a co-chair of the House Democratic Policy and Communications Committee. She is also a member of the House Energy and Commerce Committee.


Trahan is not the first federal lawmaker to receive a bomb threat over the past month.


Six Democratic members of Congress from Connecticut were targeted on Thanksgiving by bomb threats at their homes.


Sen. Chris Murphy and Reps. Jim Himes, Joe Courtney, John Larson, Jahana Hayes, and Rosa DeLauro reported the threats. Law enforcement authorities found no evidence of explosives on their properties.


This is a developing story…


Materials from the Associated Press were used in this report.


Originally Published: December 7, 2024 at 12:36 PM EST